<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18: The Final Phase</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">The Final Phase</span>
			</h2>
			<p>The foregoing chapters of this book represent the general narrative of our Expedition. That we failed in accomplishing the object we set out for was due, I venture to assert, not to any neglect or lack of organization, but to the overwhelming natural obstacles, especially the unprecedentedly severe summer conditions on the Weddell Sea side. But though the Expedition was a failure in one respect, I think it was successful in many others. A large amount of important scientific work was carried out. The meteorological observations in particular have an economic bearing. The hydrographical work in the Weddell Sea has done much to clear up the mystery of this, the least known of all the seas. I have appended a short scientific memorandum to this volume, but the more detailed scientific results must wait until a more suitable time arrives, when more stable conditions prevail. Then results will be worked out.</p>
			<p>To the credit side of the Expedition one can safely say that the comradeship and resource of the members of the Expedition was worthy of the highest traditions of Polar service; and it was a privilege to me to have had under my command men who, through dark days and the stress and strain of continuous danger, kept up their spirits and carried out their work regardless of themselves and heedless of the limelight. The same energy and endurance that they showed in the Antarctic they brought to the greater war in the Old World. And having followed our fortunes in the South you may be interested to know that practically every member of the Expedition was employed in one or other branches of the active fighting forces during the war. Several are still abroad, and for this very reason it has been impossible for me to obtain certain details for this book.</p>
			<p>Of the fifty-three men who returned out of the fifty-six who left for the South, three have since been killed and five wounded. Four decorations have been won, and several members of the Expedition have been mentioned in dispatches. McCarthy, the best and most efficient of the sailors, always cheerful under the most trying circumstances, and who for these very reasons I chose to accompany me on the boat journey to South Georgia, was killed at his gun in the Channel. Cheetham, the veteran of the Antarctic, who had been more often south of the Antarctic circle than any man, was drowned when the vessel he was serving in was torpedoed, a few weeks before the Armistice. Ernest Wild, Frank Wild’s brother, was killed while minesweeping in the Mediterranean. Mauger, the carpenter on the <i>Aurora</i> , was badly wounded while serving with the New Zealand Infantry, so that he is unable to follow his trade again. He is now employed by the New Zealand Government. The two surgeons, Macklin and McIlroy, served in France and Italy, McIlroy being badly wounded at Ypres. Frank Wild, in view of his unique experience of ice and ice conditions, was at once sent to the North Russian front, where his zeal and ability won him the highest praise.</p>
			<p>Macklin served first with the Yorks and later transferred as medical officer to the Tanks, where he did much good work. Going to the Italian front with his battalion, he won the Military Cross for bravery in tending wounded under fire.</p>
			<p>James joined the Royal Engineers, Sound Ranging Section, and after much front-line work was given charge of a Sound Ranging School to teach other officers this latest and most scientific addition to the art of war.</p>
			<p>Wordie went to France with the Royal Field Artillery and was badly wounded at Armentières.</p>
			<p>Hussey was in France for eighteen months with the Royal Garrison Artillery, serving in every big battle from Dixmude to Saint-Quentin.</p>
			<p>Worsley, known to his intimates as Depth-Charge Bill, owing to his success with that particular method of destroying German submarines, has the Distinguished Service Order and three submarines to his credit.</p>
			<p>Stenhouse, who commanded the <i>Aurora</i> after Mackintosh landed, was with Worsley as his second in command when one of the German submarines was rammed and sunk, and received the D.S.C. for his share in the fight. He was afterwards given command of a Mystery Ship, and fought several actions with enemy submarines.</p>
			<p>Clark served on a mine-sweeper. Greenstreet was employed with the barges on the Tigris. Rickenson was commissioned as Engineer-Lieutenant, R.N. Kerr returned to the Merchant Service as an engineer.</p>
			<p>Most of the crew of the <i>Endurance</i> served on minesweepers.</p>
			<p>Of the Ross Sea Party, Mackintosh, Hayward, and Spencer-Smith died for their country as surely as any who gave up their lives on the fields of France and Flanders. Hooke, the wireless operator, now navigates an airship.</p>
			<p>Nearly all of the crew of the <i>Aurora</i> joined the New Zealand Field Forces and saw active service in one or other of the many theatres of war. Several have been wounded, but it has been impossible to obtain details.</p>
			<p>On my return, after the rescue of the survivors of the Ross Sea Party, I offered my services to the Government, and was sent on a mission to South America. When this was concluded I was commissioned as Major and went to North Russia in charge of Arctic Equipment and Transport, having with me Worsley, Stenhouse, Hussey, Macklin, and Brocklehurst, who was to have come South with us, but who, as a regular officer, rejoined his unit on the outbreak of war. He has been wounded three times and was in the retreat from Mons. Worsley was sent across to the Archangel front, where he did excellent work, and the others served with me on the Murmansk front. The mobile columns there had exactly the same clothing, equipment, and sledging food as we had on the Expedition. No expense was spared to obtain the best of everything for them, and as a result not a single case of avoidable frost-bite was reported.</p>
			<p>Taking the Expedition as a unit, out of fifty-six men three died in the Antarctic, three were killed in action, and five have been wounded, so that our casualties have been fairly high.</p>
			<p>Though some have gone there are enough left to rally round and form a nucleus for the next Expedition, when troublous times are over and scientific exploration can once more be legitimately undertaken.</p>
			<hr/>
			<h2>
				<a name="19"> APPENDIX I </a>
			</h2>
			<h2>SCIENTIFIC WORK</h2>
			<p>
				<b> By J. M. WORDIE, M.A. (Cantab.), Lieut. R.F.A. </b>
			</p>
			<p>The research undertaken by the Expedition was originally planned for a shore party working from a fixed base on land, but it was only in South Georgia that this condition of affairs was fully realized. On this island, where a full month was spent, the geologist made very extensive collections, and began the mapping of the country; the magnetician had some of his instruments in working order for a short while; and the meteorologist was able to co-operate with the Argentine observer stationed at Grytviken. It had been realized how important the meteorological observations were going to be to the Argentine Government, and they accordingly did all in their power to help, both before and at the end of the Expedition. The biologist devoted most of his time, meanwhile, to the whaling industry, there being no less than seven stations on the island; he also made collections of the neritic fauna, and, accompanied by the photographer, studied the bird life and the habits of the sea-elephants along the east coast.</p>
			<p>By the time the actual southern voyage commenced, each individual had his own particular line of work which he was prepared to follow out. The biologist at first confined himself to collecting the <i>plankton</i> , and a start was made in securing water samples for temperature and salinity. In this, from the beginning, he had the help of the geologist, who also gave instructions for the taking of a line of soundings under the charge of the ship’s officers. This period of the southward voyage was a very busy time so far as the scientists were concerned, for, besides their own particular work, they took the full share of looking after the dogs and working the ship watch by watch. At the same time, moreover, the biologist had to try and avoid being too lavish with his preserving material at the expense of the shore station collections which were yet to make.</p>
			<p>When it was finally known that the ship had no longer any chance of getting free of the ice in the 1914–1915 season, a radical change was made in the arrangements. The scientists were freed, as far as possible, from ship’s duties, and were thus able to devote themselves almost entirely to their own particular spheres. The meteorological investigations took on a more definite shape; the instruments intended for the land base were set up on board ship, including self-recording barographs, thermometers, and a Dines anemometer, with which very satisfactory results were got. The physicist set up his quadrant electrometer after a good deal of trouble, but throughout the winter had to struggle constantly with rime forming on the parts of his apparatus exposed to the outer air. Good runs were being thus continually spoilt. The determination of the magnetic constants also took up a good part of his time.</p>
			<p>Besides collecting <i>plankton</i> the biologist was now able to put down one or other of his dredges at more frequent intervals, always taking care, however, not to exhaust his store of preserving material, which was limited. The taking of water samples was established on a better system, so that the series should be about equally spaced out over the ship’s course. The geologist suppressed all thought of rocks, though occasionally they were met with in bottom samples; his work became almost entirely oceanographical, and included a study of the sea-ice, of the physiography of the sea floor as shown by daily soundings, and of the bottom deposits; besides this he helped the biologist in the temperature and salinity observations.</p>
			<p>The work undertaken and accomplished by each member was as wide as possible; but it was only in keeping with the spirit of the times that more attention should be paid to work from which practical and economic results were likely to accrue. The meteorologist had always in view the effect of Antarctic climate on the other southern continents, the geologist looked on ice from a seaman’s point of view, and the biologist not unwillingly put whales in the forefront of his programme. The accounts which follow on these very practical points show how closely scientific work in the Antarctica is in touch with, and helps on the economic development of, the inhabited lands to the north.</p>
			<hr/>
			<h2>
				<a name="20"> SEA-ICE NOMENCLATURE </a>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<b> By J. M. WORDIE, M.A. (Cantab.), Lieut. R.F.A. </b>
			</p>
			<p>During the voyage of the <i>Endurance</i> it was soon noticed that the terms being used to describe different forms of ice were not always in agreement with those given in Markham’s and Mill’s glossary in “The Antarctic Manual,” 1901. It was the custom, of course, to follow implicitly the terminology used by those of the party whose experience of ice dated back to Captain Scott’s first voyage, so that the terms used may be said to be common to all Antarctic voyages of the present century. The principal changes, therefore, in nomenclature must date from the last quarter of the nineteenth century, when there was no one to pass on the traditional usage from the last naval Arctic Expedition in 1875 to the <i>Discovery</i> Expedition of 1901. On the latter ship Markham’s and Mill’s glossary was, of course, used, but apparently not slavishly; founded, as far as sea-ice went, on Scoresby’s, made in 1820, it might well have been adopted in its entirety, for no writer could have carried more weight than Scoresby the younger, combining as he did more than ten years’ whaling experience with high scientific attainments. Above all others he could be accepted both by practical seamen and also by students of ice forms.</p>
			<p>That the old terms of Scoresby did not all survive the period of indifference to Polar work, in spite of Markham and Mill, is an indication either that their usefulness has ceased or that the original usage has changed once and for all. A restatement of terms is therefore now necessary. Where possible the actual phrases of Scoresby and of his successors, Markham and Mill, are still used. The principle adopted, however, is to give preference to the words actually used by the Polar seamen themselves.</p>
			<p>The following authorities have been followed as closely as possible:</p>
			<p>W. Scoresby, Jun., “An Account of the Arctic Regions,” 1820, vol. i, pp. 225–233, 238–241.</p>
			<p>C. R. Markham and H. R. Mill in “The Antarctic Manual,” 1901, pp, xiv–xvi.</p>
			<p>J. Payer, “New Lands within the Arctic Circle,” 1876, vol. i, pp. 3–14.</p>
			<p>W. S. Bruce, “Polar Exploration” in Home University Library, c. 1911, pp. 54–71.</p>
			<p>Reference should also be made to the annual publication of the Danish Meteorological Institute showing the Arctic ice conditions of the previous summer. This is published in both Danish and English, so that the terms used there are bound to have a very wide acceptance; it is hoped, therefore, that they may be the means of preventing the Antarctic terminology following a different line of evolution; for but seldom is a seaman found nowadays who knows both Polar regions. On the Danish charts six different kinds of sea-ice are marked—namely, unbroken polar ice; land-floe; great ice-fields; tight pack-ice; open ice; bay-ice and brash. With the exception of bay-ice, which is more generally known as young ice, all these terms pass current in the Antarctic.</p>
			<p><i>Slush</i> or <i>Sludge</i> . The initial stages in the freezing of sea-water, when its consistency becomes gluey or soupy. The term is also used (but not commonly) for brash-ice still further broken down.</p>
			<p><i>Pancake-ice</i> . Small circular floes with raised rims; due to the break-up in a gently ruffled sea of the newly formed ice into pieces which strike against each other, and so form turned-up edges.</p>
			<p><i>Young Ice</i> . Applied to all unhummocked ice up to about a foot in thickness. Owing to the fibrous or platy structure, the floes crack easily, and where the ice is not over thick a ship under steam cuts a passage without much difficulty. Young ice may originate from the coalescence of “pancakes,” where the water is slightly ruffled or else be a sheet of “black ice,” covered maybe with “ice-flowers,” formed by the freezing of a smooth sheet of sea-water.</p>
			<p>In the Arctic it has been the custom to call this form of ice “bay-ice”; in the Antarctic, however, the latter term is wrongly used for land-floes (fast-ice, etc.), and has been so misapplied consistently for fifteen years. The term bay-ice should possibly, therefore, be dropped altogether, especially since, even in the Arctic, its meaning is not altogether a rigid one, as it may denote firstly the gluey “slush,” which forms when sea-water freezes, and secondly the firm level sheet ultimately produced.</p>
			<p><i>Land floes</i> . Heavy but not necessarily hummocked ice, with generally a deep snow covering, which has remained held up in the position of growth by the enclosing nature of some feature of the coast, or by grounded bergs throughout the summer season when most of the ice breaks out. Its thickness is, therefore, above the average. Has been called at various times “fast-ice,” “coast-ice,” “land-ice,” “bay-ice” by Shackleton and David and the Charcot Expedition; and possibly what Drygalski calls <i>Schelfeis</i> is not very different.</p>
			<p><i>Floe</i> . An area of ice, level or hummocked, whose limits are within sight. Includes all sizes between brash on the one hand and fields on the other. “Light-floes” are between one and two feet in thickness (anything thinner being “young-ice”). Those exceeding two feet in thickness are termed “heavy floes,” being generally hummocked, and in the Antarctic, at any rate, covered by fairly deep snow.</p>
			<p><i>Field</i> . A sheet of ice of such extent that its limits cannot be seen from the masthead.</p>
			<p><i>Hummocking</i> . Includes all the processes of pressure formation whereby level young ice becomes broken up and built up into</p>
			<p><i>Hummocky Floes</i> . The most suitable term for what has also been called “old pack” and “screwed pack” by David and <i>Scholleneis</i> by German writers. In contrast to young ice, the structure is no longer fibrous, but becomes spotted or bubbly, a certain percentage of salt drains away, and the ice becomes almost translucent.</p>
			<p><i>The Pack</i> is a term very often used in a wide sense to include any area of sea-ice, no matter what form it takes or how disposed. The French term is <i>banquise de derive</i> .</p>
			<p><i>Pack-ice</i> . A more restricted use than the above, to include hummocky floes or close areas of young ice and light floes. Pack-ice is “close” or “tight” if the floes constituting it are in contact; “open” if, for the most part, they do not touch. In both cases it hinders, but does not necessarily check, navigation; the contrary holds for</p>
			<p><i>Drift-ice</i> . Loose open ice, where the area of water exceeds that of ice. Generally drift-ice is within reach of the swell, and is a stage in the breaking down of pack-ice, the size of the floes being much smaller than in the latter. (Scoresby’s use of the term drift-ice for pieces of ice intermediate in size between floes and brash has, however, quite died out). The Antarctic or Arctic pack usually has a girdle or fringe of drift-ice.</p>
			<p><i>Brash</i> . Small fragments and roundish nodules; the wreck of other kinds of ice.</p>
			<p><i>Bergy Bits</i> . Pieces, about the size of a cottage, of glacier-ice or of hummocky pack washed clear of snow.</p>
			<p><i>Growlers</i> . Still smaller pieces of sea-ice than the above, greenish in colour, and barely showing above water-level.</p>
			<p><i>Crack</i> . Any sort of fracture or rift in the sea-ice covering.</p>
			<p><i>Lead</i> or <i>Lane</i> . Where a crack opens out to such a width as to be navigable. In the Antarctic it is customary to speak of these as leads, even when frozen over to constitute areas of young ice.</p>
			<p><i>Pools</i> . Any enclosed water areas in the pack, where length and breadth are about equal.</p>
			<hr/>
			<h2>
				<a name="21"> METEOROLOGY </a>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<b> By L. D. A. HUSSEY, B.Sc., (Lond.), Capt. R.G.A. </b>
			</p>
			<p>The meteorological results of the Expedition, when properly worked out and correlated with those from other stations in the southern hemisphere, will be extremely valuable, both for their bearing on the science of meteorology in general, and for their practical and economic applications.</p>
			<p>South America is, perhaps, more intimately concerned than any other country, but Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa are all affected by the weather conditions of the Antarctic. Researches are now being carried on which tend to show that the meteorology of the two hemispheres is more interdependent than was hitherto believed, so that a meteorological disturbance in one part of the world makes its presence felt, more or less remotely perhaps, all over the world.</p>
			<p>It is evident, therefore, that a complete knowledge of the weather conditions in any part of the world, which it is understood carries with it the ability to make correct forecasts, can never be obtained unless the weather conditions in every other part are known. This makes the need for purely scientific Polar Expeditions so imperative, since our present knowledge of Arctic and Antarctic meteorology is very meagre, and to a certain extent unsystematic. What is wanted is a chain of observing stations well equipped with instruments and trained observers stretching across the Antarctic Continent. A series of exploring ships could supplement these observations with others made by them while cruising in the Antarctic Seas. It would pay to do this, even for the benefit accruing to farmers, sailors, and others who are so dependent on the weather.</p>
			<p>As an instance of the value of a knowledge of Antarctic weather conditions, it may be mentioned that, as the result of observations and researches carried out at the South Orkneys—a group of sub-Antarctic islands at the entrance to the Weddell Sea—it has been found that a cold winter in that sea is a sure precursor of a drought over the maize and cereal bearing area of Argentina three and a half years later. To the farmers, the value of this knowledge so far in advance is enormous, and since England has some three hundred million pounds sterling invested in Argentine interests, Antarctic Expeditions have proved, and will prove, their worth even from a purely commercial point of view.</p>
			<p>I have given just this one instance to satisfy those who question the utility of Polar Expeditions, but many more could be cited.</p>
			<p>As soon as it was apparent that no landing could be made, and that we should have to spend a winter in the ship drifting round with the pack, instruments were set up and observations taken just as if we had been ashore.</p>
			<p>A meteorological screen or box was erected on a platform over the stern, right away from the living quarters, and in it were placed the maximum and minimum thermometers, the recording barograph, and thermograph—an instrument which writes every variation of the temperature and pressure on a sheet of paper on a revolving drum—and the standard thermometer, a very carefully manufactured thermometer, with all its errors determined and tabulated. The other thermometers were all checked from this one. On top of the screen a Robinson’s anemometer was screwed. This consisted of an upright rod, to the top of which were pivoted four arms free to revolve in a plane at right angles to it. At the end of these arms hemispherical cups were screwed. These were caught by the wind and the arms revolved at a speed varying with the force of the wind. The speed of the wind could be read off on a dial below the arms.</p>
			<p>In addition there was an instrument called a Dines anemometer which supplied interesting tracings of the force, duration, and direction of the wind. There was an added advantage in the fact that the drum on which these results were recorded was comfortably housed down below, so that one could sit in a comparatively warm room and follow all the varying phases of the blizzard which was raging without. The barometer used was of the Kew Standard pattern. When the ship was crushed, all the monthly records were saved, but the detailed tracings, which had been packed up in the hold, were lost. Though interesting they were not really essential. Continuous observations were made during the long drift on the floe and while on Elephant Island the temperature was taken at midday each day as long as the thermometers lasted. The mortality amongst these instruments, especially those which were tied to string and swung round, was very high.</p>
			<p>A few extracts from the observations taken during 1915—the series for that year being practically complete—may be of interest. January was dull and overcast, only 7 per cent. of the observations recording a clear blue sky, 71 per cent. being completely overcast.</p>
			<p>The percentage of clear sky increased steadily up till June and July, these months showing respectively 42 per cent. and 45.7 per cent. In August 40 per cent. of the observations were clear sky, while September showed a sudden drop to 27 per cent. October weather was much the same, and November was practically overcast the whole time, clear sky showing at only 8 per cent. of the observations. In December the sky was completely overcast for nearly 90 per cent. of the time.</p>
			<p>Temperatures on the whole were fairly high, though a sudden unexpected drop in February, after a series of heavy north-easterly gales, caused the ship to be frozen in, and effectually put an end to any hopes of landing that year. The lowest temperature experienced was in July, when —35° Fahr., <i>i.e.</i> 67° below freezing, was reached. Fortunately, as the sea was one mass of consolidated pack, the air was dry, and many days of fine bright sunshine occurred. Later on, as the pack drifted northwards and broke up, wide lanes of water were formed, causing fogs and mist and dull overcast weather generally. In short, it may be said that in the Weddell Sea the best weather comes in winter. Unfortunately during that season the sun also disappears, so that one cannot enjoy it as much as one would like.</p>
			<p>As a rule, too, southerly winds brought fine clear weather, with marked fall in the temperature, and those from the north were accompanied by mist, fog, and overcast skies, with comparatively high temperatures. In the Antarctic a temperature of 30°, <i>i.e.</i> 2° <i>below</i> freezing, is considered unbearably hot.</p>
			<p>The greatest difficulty that was experienced was due to the accumulation of rime on the instruments. In low temperatures everything became covered with ice-crystals, deposited from the air, which eventually grew into huge blocks. Sometimes these blocks became dislodged and fell, making it dangerous to walk along the decks. The rime collected on the thermometers, the glass bowl of the sunshine recorder, and the bearings of the anemometer, necessitating the frequent use of a brush to remove it, and sometimes effectively preventing the instruments from recording at all.</p>
			<p>One of our worst blizzards occurred on August 1, 1915, which was, for the ship, the beginning of the end. It lasted for four days, with cloudy and overcast weather for the three following days, and from that time onwards we enjoyed very little sun.</p>
			<p>The weather that we experienced on Elephant Island can only be described as appalling. Situated as we were at the mouth of a gully, down which a huge glacier was slowly moving, with the open sea in front and to the left, and towering, snow-covered mountains on our right, the air was hardly ever free from snowdrift, and the winds increased to terrific violence through being forced over the glacier and through the narrow gully. Huge blocks of ice were hurled about like pebbles, and cases of clothing and cooking utensils were whisked out of our hands and carried away to sea. For the first fortnight after our landing there, the gale blew, at times, at over one hundred miles an hour. Fortunately it never again quite reached that intensity, but on several occasions violent squalls made us very fearful for the safety of our hut. The island was almost continuously covered with a pall of fog and snow, clear weather obtaining occasionally when pack-ice surrounded us. Fortunately a series of south-westerly gales had blown all the ice away to the north-east two days before the rescue ship arrived, leaving a comparatively clear sea for her to approach the island.</p>
			<p>Being one solitary moving station in the vast expanse of the Weddell Sea, with no knowledge of what was happening anywhere around us, forecasting was very difficult and at times impossible.</p>
			<p>Great assistance in this direction was afforded by copies of Mr. R. C. Mossmann’s researches and papers on Antarctic meteorology, which he kindly supplied to us.</p>
			<p>I have tried to make this very brief account of the meteorological side of the Expedition rather more “popular” than scientific, since the publication and scientific discussion of the observations will be carried out elsewhere; but if, while showing the difficulties under which we had to work, it emphasizes the value of Antarctic Expeditions from a purely utilitarian point of view, and the need for further continuous research into the conditions obtaining in the immediate neighbourhood of the Pole, it will have achieved its object.</p>
			<hr/>
			<h2>
				<a name="22"> PHYSICS </a>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<b> By R. W. JAMES, M.A. (Cantab.), B.Sc. (Lond.), Capt. R.E. </b>
			</p>
			<p>Owing to the continued drift of the ship with the ice, the programme of physical observations originally made out had to be considerably modified. It had been intended to set up recording magnetic instruments at the base, and to take a continuous series of records throughout the whole period of residence there, absolute measurements of the earth’s horizontal magnetic force, of the dip and declination being taken at frequent intervals for purposes of calibration. With the ice continually drifting, and the possibility of the floe cracking at any time, it proved impracticable to set up the recording instruments, and the magnetic observations were confined to a series of absolute measurements taken whenever opportunity occurred. These measurements, owing to the drift of the ship, extend over a considerable distance, and give a chain of values along a line stretching, roughly from 77° S. lat. to 69° S. lat. This is not the place to give the actual results; it is quite enough to state that, as might have been expected from the position of the magnetic pole, the values obtained correspond to a comparatively low magnetic latitude, the value of the dip ranging from 63° to 68°.</p>
			<p>So far as possible, continuous records of the electric potential gradient in the atmosphere were taken, a form of quadrant electrometer with a boom and ink recorder, made by the Cambridge Scientific Instrument Company, being employed. Here again, the somewhat peculiar conditions made work difficult, as the instrument was very susceptible to small changes of level, such as occurred from time to time owing to the pressure of the ice on the ship. An ionium collector, for which the radioactive material was kindly supplied by Mr. F. H. Glew, was used. The chief difficulty to contend with was the constant formation of thick deposits of rime, which either grew over the insulation and spoiled it, or covered up the collector so that it could no longer act. Nevertheless, a considerable number of good records were obtained, which have not yet been properly worked out. Conditions during the Expedition were very favourable for observations on the physical properties and natural history of sea-ice, and a considerable number of results were obtained, which are, however, discussed elsewhere, mention of them being made here since they really come under the heading of physics.</p>
			<p>In addition to these main lines of work, many observations of a miscellaneous character were made, including those on the occurrence and nature of parhelia or “mock suns,” which were very common, and generally finely developed, and observations of the auroral displays, which were few and rather poor owing to the comparatively low magnetic latitude. Since most of the observations made are of little value without a knowledge of the place where they were made, and since a very complete set of soundings were also taken, the daily determination of the ship’s position was a matter of some importance. The drift of the ship throws considerable light on at least one geographical problem, that of the existence of Morrell Land. The remainder of this appendix will therefore be devoted to a discussion of the methods used to determine the positions of the ship from day to day.</p>
			<p>The latitude and longitude were determined astronomically every day when the sun or stars were visible, the position thus determined serving as the fixed points between which the position on days when the sky was overcast could be interpolated by the process known as “dead reckoning,” that is to say, by estimating the speed and course of the ship, taking into account the various causes affecting it. The sky was often overcast for several days at a stretch, and it was worth while to take a certain amount of care in the matter. Captain Worsley constructed an apparatus which gave a good idea of the direction of drift at any time. This consisted of an iron rod, which passed through an iron tube, frozen vertically into the ice, into the water below. At the lower end of the rod, in the water, was a vane. The rod being free to turn, the vane took up the direction of the current, the direction being shown by an indicator attached to the top of the rod. The direction shown depended, of course, on the drift of the ice relative to the water, and did not take into account any actual current which may have been carrying the ice with it, but the true current seems never to have been large, and the direction of the vane probably gave fairly accurately the direction of the drift of the ice. No exact idea of the rate of drift could be obtained from the apparatus, although one could get an estimate of it by displacing the vane from its position of rest and noticing how quickly it returned to it, the speed of return being greater the more rapid the drift. Another means of estimating the speed and direction of the drift was from the trend of the wire when a sounding was being taken. The rate and direction of drift appeared to depend almost entirely on the wind-velocity and direction at the time. If any true current-effect existed, it is not obvious from a rough comparison of the drift with the prevailing wind, but a closer investigation of the figures may show some outstanding effect due to current.*</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>* Cf. “Scientific results of Norwegian North Polar Expedition, 1893–96,” vol. iii, p. 357.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The drift was always to the left of the actual wind-direction. This effect is due to the rotation of the earth, a corresponding deviation to the right of the wind direction being noted by Nansen during the drift of the <i>Fram</i> . A change in the direction of the wind was often preceded by some hours by a change in the reading of the drift vane. This is no doubt due to the ice to windward being set in motion, the resulting disturbance travelling through the ice more rapidly than the approaching wind.</p>
			<p>For the astronomical observations either the sextant or a theodolite was used. The theodolite employed was a light 3´´ Vernier instrument by Carey Porter, intended for sledging work. This instrument was fairly satisfactory, although possibly rigidity had been sacrificed to lightness to rather too great an extent. Another point which appears worth mentioning is the following: The foot-screws were of brass, the tribrach, into which they fitted, was made of aluminium for the sake of lightness. The two metals have a different coefficient of expansion, and while the feet fitted the tribrach at ordinary temperatures, they were quite loose at temperatures in the region of 20° Fahr. below zero. In any instrument designed for use at low temperatures, care should be taken that parts which have to fit together are made of the same material.</p>
			<p>For determining the position in drifting pack-ice, the theodolite proved to be a more generally useful instrument than the sextant. The ice-floes are quite steady in really thick pack-ice, and the theodolite can be set up and levelled as well as on dry land. The observations, both for latitude and longitude, consist in measuring altitude of the sun or of a star. The chief uncertainty in this measurement is that introduced by the refraction of light by the air. At very low temperatures, the correction to be applied on this account is uncertain, and, if possible, observations should always be made in pairs with a north star and a south star for a latitude, and an east star and a west star for a longitude. The refraction error will then usually mean out. This error affects observations both with the theodolite and the sextant, but in the case of the sextant another cause of error occurs. In using the sextant, the angle between the heavenly body and the visible horizon is measured directly. Even in dense pack-ice, if the observations are taken from the deck of the ship or from a hummock or a low berg, the apparent horizon is usually sharp enough for the purpose. In very cold weather, however, and particularly if there are open leads and pools between the observer and the horizon, there is frequently a great deal of mirage, and the visible horizon may be miraged up several minutes. This will reduce the altitude observed, and corrections on this account are practically impossible to apply. This error may be counterbalanced to some extent by pairing observations as described above, but it by no means follows that the mirage effect will be the same in the two directions. Then again, during the summer months, no stars will be visible, and observations for latitude will have to depend on a single noon sight of the sun. If the sun is visible at midnight its altitude will be too low for accurate observations, and in any case atmospheric conditions will be quite different from those prevailing at noon. In the Antarctic, therefore, conditions are peculiarly difficult for getting really accurate observations, and it is necessary to reduce the probability of error in a single observation as much as possible. When possible, observations of the altitude of a star or of the sun should be taken with the theodolite, since the altitude is referred to the spirit-level of the instrument, and is independent of any apparent horizon. During the drift of the <i>Endurance</i> both means of observation were generally employed. A comparison of the results showed an agreement between sextant and theodolite, within the errors of the instrument if the temperature was above about 20° Fahr. At lower temperatures there were frequently discrepancies which could generally be attributed to the mirage effects described above.</p>
			<p>As the <i>Endurance</i> was carried by the ice-drift well to the west of the Weddell Sea, towards the position of the supposed Morrell Land, the accurate determination of longitude became a matter of moment in view of the controversy as to the existence of this land. During a long voyage latitude can always be determined with about the same accuracy, the accuracy merely depending on the closeness with which altitudes can be measured. In the case of longitude matters are rather different. The usual method employed consists in the determination of the local time by astronomical observations, and the comparison of this time with Greenwich time, as shown by the ship’s chronometer, an accurate knowledge of the errors and rate of the chronometer being required. During the voyage of the <i>Endurance</i> about fifteen months elapsed during which no check on the chronometers could be obtained by the observation of known land, and had no other check been applied there would have been the probability of large errors in the longitudes. For the purpose of checking the chronometers a number of observations of occultations were observed during the winter of 1915. An occultation is really the eclipse of a star by the moon. A number of such eclipses occur monthly, and are tabulated in the “Nautical Almanac.” From the data given there it is possible to compute the Greenwich time at which the phenomenon ought to occur for an observer situated at any place on the earth, provided his position is known within a few miles, which will always be the case. The time of disappearance of the star by the chronometer to be corrected is noted. The actual Greenwich time of the occurrence is calculated, and the error of the chronometer is thus determined. With ordinary care the chronometer error can be determined in this way to within a few seconds, which is accurate enough for purposes of navigation. The principal difficulties of this method lie in the fact that comparatively few occultations occur, and those which do occur are usually of stars of the fifth magnitude or lower. In the Antarctic, conditions for observing occultation are rather favourable during the winter, since, fifth-magnitude stars can be seen with a small telescope at any time during the twenty-four hours if the sky is clear, and the moon is also often above the horizon for a large fraction of the time. In the summer, however, the method is quite impossible, since, for some months, stars are not to be seen.</p>
			<p>No chronometer check could be applied until June 1915. On June 24 a series of four occultations were observed; and the results of the observations showed an error in longitude of a whole degree. In July, August, and September further occultations were observed, and a fairly reliable rate was worked out for the chronometers and watches. After the crushing of the ship on October 27, 1915, no further occultations were observed, but the calculated rates for the watches were employed, and the longitude deduced, using these rates on March 23, 1916, was only about 10´ of arc in error, judging by the observations of Joinville Land made on that day. It is thus fairly certain that no large error can have been made in the determination of the position of the <i>Endurance</i> at any time during the drift, and her course can be taken as known with greater certainty than is usually the case in a voyage of such length.</p>
			<hr/>
			<h2>
				<a name="23"> SOUTH ATLANTIC WHALES AND WHALING </a>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<b> By ROBERT S. CLARK, M.A., B.Sc., Lieut. R.N.V.R. </b>
			</p>
			<p>Modern whaling methods were introduced into sub-Antarctic seas in 1904, and operations commenced in the following year at South Georgia. So successful was the initial venture that several companies were floated, and the fishing area was extended to the South Shetlands, the South Orkneys, and as far as 67° S along the western coast of Graham Land. This area lies within the Dependencies of the Falkland Islands, and is under the control of the British Government, and its geographical position offers exceptional opportunities for the successful prosecution of the industry by providing a sufficient number of safe anchorages and widely separated islands, where shore stations have been established. The Dependencies of the Falkland Islands lie roughly within latitude 50° and 65° S. and longitude 25° and 70° W., and include the Falkland Islands, South Georgia, South Sandwich, South Orkney, and South Shetland Islands, and part of Graham Land.</p>
			<p>The industry is prosperous, and the products always find a ready market. In this sub-Antarctic area alone, the resulting products more than doubled the world’s supply. The total value of the Falkland Island Dependencies in 1913 amounted to £1,252,432, in 1914 to £1,300,978, in 1915 to £1,333,401, and in 1916 to £1,774,570. This has resulted chiefly from the marketing of whale oil and the by-product, guano, and represents for each total a season’s capture of several thousand whales. In 1916, the number of whales captured in this area was 11,860, which included 6000 for South Georgia alone. Whale oil, which is now the product of most economic value in the whaling industry, is produced in four grades (some companies adding a fifth). These are Nos. 0, I, II, III, IV, which in 1913 sold at £24, £22, £20, and £18 respectively per ton, net weight, barrels included (there are six barrels to a ton). The 1919 prices have increased to</p>
			<blockquote style="margin-top:5.0pt;margin-bottom:5.0pt">
				<p>£72 10s. per ton (barrels included) less 2½ per cent.<br/> £68 per ton (barrels included) less 2½ per cent.<br/> £65 ” ” ” ” ” ” ”<br/> £63 ” ” ” ” ” ” ”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Whale oil can be readily transformed into glycerine: it is used in the manufacture of soap, and quite recently, both in this country and in Norway, it has been refined by means of a simple hardening process into a highly palatable and nutritious margarine. Wartime conditions emphasized the importance of the whale oil, and fortunately the supply was fairly constant for the production of the enormous quantities of glycerine required by the country in the manufacture of explosives. In relation to the food supply, it was no less important in saving the country from a “fat” famine, when the country was confronted with the shortage of vegetable and other animal oils. The production of guano, bone-meal, and flesh-meal may pay off the running expenses of a whaling-station, but their value lies, perhaps, more in their individual properties. Flesh-meal makes up into cattle-cake, which forms an excellent fattening food for cattle, while bone-meal and guano are very effective fertilizers. Guano is the meat—generally the residue of distillation—which goes through a process of drying and disintegration, and is mixed with the crushed bone in the proportion of two parts flesh to one part bone. This is done chiefly at the shore stations, and, to a less extent on floating factories, though so far on the latter it has not proved very profitable. Whale flesh, though slightly greasy perhaps and of strong flavour, is quite palatable, and at South Georgia, it made a welcome addition to our bill of fare—the flesh of the hump back being used. A large supply of whale flesh was “shipped” as food for the dogs on the journey South, and this was eaten ravenously. It is interesting to note also the successful rearing of pigs at South Georgia—chiefly, if not entirely, on the whale products. The whalebone or baleen plates, which at one time formed the most valuable article of the Arctic fishery, may here be regarded as of secondary importance. The baleen plates of the southern right whale reach only a length of about 7 ft., and have been valued at £750 per ton, but the number of these whales captured is very small indeed. In the case of the other whalebone whales, the baleen plates are much smaller and of inferior quality—the baleen of the sei whale probably excepted, and this only makes about £85 per ton, Sperm whales have been taken at South Georgia and the South Shetlands, but never in any quantity, being more numerous in warmer areas. The products and their value are too well known to be repeated.</p>
			<p>The <i>Endurance</i> reached South Georgia on November 5, 1914, and anchored in King Edward Cove, Cumberland Bay, off Grytviken, the shore station of the Argentina Pesca Company. During the month’s stay at the island a considerable amount of time was devoted to a study of the whales and the whaling industry, in the intervals of the general routine of expedition work, and simultaneously with other studies on the general life of this interesting sub-Antarctic island. Visits were made to six of the seven existing stations, observations were made on the whales landed, and useful insight was gathered as to the general working of the industry.</p>
			<p>From South Georgia the track of the <i>Endurance</i> lay in a direct line to the South Sandwich Group, between Saunders and Candlemas Islands. Then south-easterly and southerly courses were steered to the Coats’ Land barrier, along which we steamed for a few hundred miles until forced westward, when we were unfortunately held up in about lat. 76° 34´ S. and long. 37° 30´ W. on January 19, 1915, by enormous masses of heavy pack-ice. The ship drifted to lat. 76° 59´ S., long. 37° 47´ W. on March 19, 1915, and then west and north until crushed in lat. 69° 5´ S. and long. 51° 30´ W. on October 26, 1915. We continued drifting gradually north, afloat on ice-floes, past Graham Land and Joinville Island, and finally took to the boats on April 9, 1916, and reached Elephant Island on April 15. The Falkland Island Dependencies were thus practically circumnavigated, and it may be interesting to compare the records of whales seen in the region outside and to the south of this area with the records and the percentage of each species captured in the intensive fishing area.</p>
			<p>The most productive part of the South Atlantic lies south of latitude 50° S., where active operations extend to and even beyond the Antarctic circle. It appears to be the general rule in Antarctic waters that whales are more numerous the closer the association with ice conditions, and there seems to be reasonable grounds for supposing that this may explain the comparatively few whales sighted by Expeditions which have explored the more northerly and more open seas, while the whalers themselves have even asserted that their poor seasons have nearly always coincided with the absence of ice, or with poor ice conditions. At all events, those Expeditions which have penetrated far south and well into the pack-ice have, without exception, reported the presence of whales in large numbers, even in the farthest south latitudes, so that our knowledge of the occurrence of whales in the Antarctic has been largely derived from these Expeditions, whose main object was either the discovery of new land or the Pole itself. The largest number of Antarctic Expeditions has concentrated on the two areas of the South Atlantic and the Ross Sea, and the records of the occurrences of whales have, in consequence, been concentrated in these two localities. In the intervening areas, however, Expeditions, notably the <i>Belgica</i> on the western side and the <i>Gauss</i> on the eastern side of the Antarctic continent, have reported whales in moderately large numbers, so that the stock is by no means confined to the two areas above mentioned.</p>
			<p>The effective fishing area may be assumed to lie within a radius of a hundred miles from each shore station and floating-factory anchorage, and a rough estimate of all the Falkland stations works out at 160,000 square miles. The total for the whole Falkland area is about 2,000,000 square miles, which is roughly less than a sixth of the total Antarctic sea area. The question then arises as to how far the “catch percentage” during the short fishing season affects the total stock, but so far one can only conjecture as to the actual results from a comparison of the numbers seen, chiefly by scientific and other Expeditions, in areas outside the intensive fishing area with the numbers and percentage of each species captured in the intensive fishing area. Sufficient evidence, however, seems to point quite definitely to one species—the humpback—being in danger of extermination, but the blue and fin whales—the other two species of rorquals which form the bulk of the captures—appear to be as frequent now as they have ever been.</p>
			<p>The whales captured at the various whaling-stations of the Falkland area are confined largely to three species—blue whale ( <i>Balaenoptera musculus</i> ), fin whale ( <i>Balaenoptera physalis</i> ), and humpback ( <i>Megaptera nodosa</i> ); sperm whales ( <i>Physeter catodon</i> ) and right whales ( <i>Balaena glacialis</i> ) being only occasional and rare captures, while the sei whale ( <i>Balaenoptera borealis</i> ) appeared in the captures at South Georgia in 1913, and now forms a large percentage of the captures at the Falkland Islands. During the earlier years of whaling at South Georgia, and up to the fishing season 1910–11, humpbacks formed practically the total catch. In 1912–13 the following were the percentages for the three rorquals in the captures at South Georgia and South Shetlands:</p>
			<p>Humpback 38 per cent., fin whale 36 per cent., blue whale 20 per cent. Of late years the percentages have altered considerably, blue whales and fin whales predominating, humpbacks decreasing rapidly. In 1915, the South Georgia Whaling Company (Messrs. Salvesen, Leith) captured 1085 whales, consisting of 15 per cent. humpback, 25 per cent. fin whales, 58 per cent. blue whales, and 2 right whales. In the same year the captures of three companies at the South Shetlands gave 1512 whales, and the percentages worked out at 12 per cent. humpbacks, 42 per cent. fin whales, and 45 per cent. blue whales. In 1919, the Southern Whaling and Sealing Company captured (at Stromness, South Georgia) 529 whales, of which 2 per cent. were humpbacks, 51 per cent. fin whales, and 45 per cent. blue whales. These captures do not represent the total catch, but are sufficiently reliable to show how the species are affected. The reduction in numbers of the humpback is very noticeable, and even allowing for the possible increase in size of gear for the capture of the larger and more lucrative blue and fin whales, there is sufficient evidence to warrant the fears that the humpback stock is threatened with extinction.</p>
			<p>In the immediate northern areas—in the region from latitude 50° S. northward to the equator, which is regarded as next in importance quantitatively to the sub-Antarctic, though nothing like being so productive, the captures are useful for a comparative study in distribution. At Saldanha Bay, Cape Colony, in 1912, 131 whales were captured and the percentages were as follows: 35 per cent. humpback, 13 per cent. fin whale, 4 per cent. blue whale, 46 per cent. sei whale, while nearer the equator, at Port Alexander, the total capture was 322 whales, and the percentages gave 98 per cent. humpback, and only 2 captures each of fin and sei whales. In 1914, at South Africa (chiefly Saldanha Bay and Durban), out of a total of 839 whales 60 per cent. were humpback, 25 per cent. fin whales, and 13 per cent. blue whales. In 1916, out of a total of 853 whales 10 per cent. were humpback, 13 per cent. fin whales, 6 per cent. blue whales, 68 per cent. sperm whales, and 1 per cent. sei whales. In Chilian waters, in 1916, a total of 327 whales gave 31 per cent. humpbacks, 24 per cent. fin whales, 26 per cent. blue whales, 12 per cent. sperm whales, and 5 right whales. There seems then to be a definite interrelation between the two areas. The same species of whales are captured, and the periods of capture alternate with perfect regularity, the fishing season occurring from the end of November to April in the sub-Antarctic and from May to November in the sub-tropics. A few of the companies, however, carry on operations to a limited extent at South Georgia and at the Falkland islands during the southern winter, but the fishing is by no means a profitable undertaking, though proving the presence of whales in this area during the winter months.</p>
			<p>The migrations of whales are influenced by two causes:</p>
			<p>(1) The distribution of their food-supply;<br/> (2) The position of their breeding-grounds.</p>
			<p>In the Antarctic, during the summer months, there is present in the sea an abundance of plant and animal life, and whales which feed on the small <i>plankton</i> organisms are correspondingly numerous, but in winter this state of things is reversed, and whales are poorly represented or absent, at least in the higher latitudes. During the drift of the <i>Endurance</i> samples of <i>plankton</i> were taken almost daily during an Antarctic summer and winter. From December to March, a few minutes haul of a tow-net at the surface was sufficient to choke up the meshes with the plant and animal life, but this abundance of surface life broke off abruptly in April, and subsequent hauls contained very small organisms until the return of daylight and the opening up of the pack-ice. The lower water strata, down to about 100 fathoms, were only a little more productive, and <i>Euphausiae</i> were taken in the hauls—though sparingly. During the winter spent at Elephant Island, our total catch of gentoo penguins amounted to 1436 for the period April 15 to August 30, 1916. All these birds were cut up, the livers and hearts were extracted for food, and the skins were used as fuel. At the same time the stomachs were invariably examined, and a record kept of the contents. The largest proportion of these contained the small crustacean <i>Euphausia</i> , and this generally to the exclusion of other forms. Occasionally, however, small fish were recorded. The quantity of <i>Euphausiae</i> present in most of the stomachs was enormous for the size of the birds. These penguins were migrating, and came ashore only when the bays were clear of ice, as there were several periods of fourteen consecutive days when the bays and the surrounding sea were covered over with a thick compact mass of ice-floes, and then penguins were entirely absent. <i>Euphausiae</i> , then, seem to be present in sufficient quantity in certain, if not in all, sub-Antarctic waters during the southern winter. We may assume then that the migration to the south, during the Antarctic summer, is definitely in search of food. Observations have proved the existence of a northern migration, and it seems highly improbable that this should also be in search of food, but rather for breeding purposes, and it seems that the whales select the more temperate regions for the bringing forth of their young. This view is strengthened by the statistical foetal records, which show the pairing takes place in the northern areas, that the foetus is carried by the mother during the southern migration to the Antarctic, and that the calves are born in the more congenial waters north of the sub-Antarctic area. We have still to prove, however, the possibility of a circumpolar migration, and we are quite in the dark as to the number of whales that remain in sub-Antarctic areas during the Southern winter.</p>
			<p>The following is a rough classification of whales, with special reference to those known to occur in the South Atlantic:</p>
			<pre>
				<b> </b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> 1. WHALEBONE WHALES (<i>Mystacoceti</i>)</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> |</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> ____________________|__________________</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> | |</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b>Right whales (<i>Balaenidae</i>) Rorquals (<i>Balaenopteridae</i>)</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> | ________________|_________</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b>Southern right whale | |</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b>(<i>Balaena glacialis</i>) Finner whales Humpback</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> (<i>Balaenoptera</i>) (<i>Megaptera nodosa</i>)</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> |</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> |</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> Blue whale (<i>B. musculus</i>)</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> Fin whale (<i>B. physalis</i>)</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> Sei whale (<i>B. borealis</i>)</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> Piked whale (<i>B. acutorostrata</i>)</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> Bryde’s whale (<i>B. brydei</i>)</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> </b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> </b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> 2. TOOTHED WHALES (<i>Odontoceti</i>)</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> |</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> _________________________|________________________</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> | | |</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b>Sperm whale Beaked whales Dolphins</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b>(<i>Physeter catodon</i>) (including bottlenose whales) (1) Killer</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> (<i>Hyperoodon rostratus</i>) (<i>Orcinus orca</i>)</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> (2) Black Fish</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> (<i>Globicephalus melas</i>)</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> (3) Porpoises</b>
			</pre>
			<pre>
				<b> (<i>Lagenorhynchus</i> sp.)</b>
			</pre>
			<p>The subdivision of whalebone whales is one of degree in the size of the whalebone. These whales have enormously muscular tongues, which press the water through the whalebone lamellae and thus, by a filtering process, retain the small food organisms. The food of the whalebone whales is largely the small crustacea which occur in the <i>plankton</i> , though some whales (humpback, fin whales, and sei whales) feed also on fish. The stomachs examined at South Georgia during December 1914, belonged to the three species, humpbacks, fin whales, and blue whales, and all contained small crustacea— <i>Euphausiae</i> , with a mixture of <i>amphipods</i> . The toothed whales—sperms and bottlenoses—are known to live on squids, and that there is an abundance of this type of food in the Weddell Sea was proved by an examination of penguin and seal stomachs. Emperor penguins (and hundreds of these were examined) were invariably found to contain <i>Cephalopod</i> “beaks,” while large, partly digested squids were often observed in Weddell seals. A dorsal fin is present in the rorquals but absent in right whales. With other characters, notably the size of the animal, it serves as a ready mark of identification, but is occasionally confusing owing to the variation in shape in some of the species.</p>
			<p>With the exception of several schools of porpoises very few whales were seen during the outward voyage. Not till we approached the Falkland area did they appear in any numbers. Four small schools of fin whales and a few humpbacks were sighted on October 28 and 29, 1914, in lat. 38° 01´ S., long. 55° 03´ W. and in lat. 40° 35´ S., long. 53° 11´ W., while <i>Globicephalus melas</i> was seen only once, in lat. 45° 17´ S., long. 48° 58´ W., on October 31, 1914. At South Georgia, the whales captured at the various stations in December 1914, were blue whales, fin whales, and humpbacks (arranged respectively according to numbers captured). During the fishing season 1914–15 (from December to March) in the area covered—South Georgia to the South Sandwich Islands and along Coats’ Land to the head of the Weddell Sea—the records of whales were by no means numerous. Two records only could with certainty be assigned to the humpback, and these were in the neighbourhood of the South Sandwich Islands. Pack-ice was entered in lat. 59° 55´ S., long. 18° 28´ W., and blue whales were recorded daily until about 65° S. Between lat. 65° 43´ S., long. 17° 30´ W., on December 27, 1914, and lat. 69° 59´ S., long. 17° 31´ W., on January 3, 1915, no whales were seen. On January 4, however, in lat. 69° 59´ S., long. 17° 36´ W., two large sperm whales appeared close ahead of the ship in fairly open water, and were making westward. They remained sufficiently long on the surface to render their identification easy. Farther south, blue whales were only seen occasionally, and fin whales could only be identified in one or two cases. Killers, however, were numerous, and the lesser piked whale was quite frequent. There was no doubt about the identity of this latter species as it often came close alongside the ship. From April to September (inclusive) the sea was frozen over (with the exception of local “leads”), and whales were found to be absent. In October whales again made their appearance, and from then onwards they were a daily occurrence. Identification of the species, however, was a difficult matter, for the <i>Endurance</i> was crushed and had sunk, and observations were only possible from the ice-floe, or later on from the boats. The high vertical “spout” opening out into a dense spray was often visible, and denoted the presence of blue and fin whales. The lesser piked whale again appeared in the “leads” close to our “camp” floe, and was easily identified. An exceptional opportunity was presented to us on December 6, 1915, when a school of eight bottlenose whales ( <i>Hyperoodon rostratus</i> ) appeared in small “pool” alongside “Ocean” Camp in lat. 67° 47´ S., long. 52° 18´ W. These ranged from about 20 ft. to a little over 30 ft. in length, and were of a uniform dark dun colour—the large specimens having a dull yellow appearance. There were no white spots. At the edge of the pack-ice during the first half of April 1916, about lat. 62° S. and long. 54° W. (entrance to Bransfield Strait), whales were exceedingly numerous, and these were chiefly fin whales, though a few seemed to be sei whales. It is interesting to note that the fishing season 1915–1916 was exceptionally productive—no less than 11,860 whales having been captured in the Falkland area alone.</p>
			<p>The South Atlantic whaling industry, then, has reached a critical stage in development. It is now dependent on the captures of the large fin and blue whales, humpbacks having been rapidly reduced in numbers, so that the total stock appears to have been affected. With regard to the other species, the southern right whale has never been abundant in the captures, the sperm whale and the sei whale have shown a good deal of seasonal variation, though never numerous, and the bottlenose and lesser piked whale have so far not been hunted, except in the case of the latter for human food. The vigorous slaughter of whales both in the sub-Antarctic and in the sub-tropics, for the one area reacts on the other, calls for universal legislation to protect the whales from early commercial extinction, and the industry, which is of world-wide economic importance, from having to be abandoned. The British Government, with the control of the world’s best fisheries, is thoroughly alive to the situation, and an Inter-departmental Committee, under the direction of the Colonial Office, is at present devising a workable scheme for suitable legislation for the protection of the whales and for the welfare of the industry.</p>
			<hr/>
			<h2>
				<a name="24"> APPENDIX II </a>
			</h2>
			<h2>THE EXPEDITION HUTS AT McMURDO SOUND</h2>
			<p>
				<b> By SIR E. H. SHACKLETON </b>
			</p>
			<p>The following notes are designed for the benefit of future explorers who may make McMurdo Sound a base for inland operations, and to clear any inaccuracies or ambiguities concerning the history, occupation, and state of these huts.</p>
			<p><br/> (1) THE NATIONAL ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION’S HUT AT HUT POINT—THE HEAD OF McMURDO SOUND</p>
			<p>This hut was constructed by Captain Scott in 1902, by the Expedition sent out by the Royal Geographical Society, the Royal Society, the Government, and by private subscription. Captain Robert F. Scott was appointed to the command of the Expedition. I served as Third Lieutenant until February 1903, when I was invalided home through a broken blood vessel in the lungs, the direct result of scurvy contracted on the Southern journey. The <i>Discovery</i> hut was a large strong building, but was so draughty and cold in comparison with the ship, which was moored one hundred yards away, that it was, during the first year, never used for living quarters. Its sole use was as a storehouse, and a large supply of rough stores, such as flour, cocoa, coffee, biscuit, and tinned meat, was left there in the event of its being used as a place of retreat should any disaster overtake the ship. During the second year occasional parties camped inside the hut, but no bunks or permanent sleeping quarters were ever erected. The discomfort of the hut was a byword on the Expedition, but it formed an excellent depot and starting-point for all parties proceeding to the south.</p>
			<p>When the <i>Discovery</i> finally left McMurdo Sound, the hut was stripped of all gear, including the stove, but there was left behind a large depot of the stores mentioned above. I was not aware of this until I returned to McMurdo Sound in February 1908, when I sent Adams, Joyce, and Wild across to the hut whilst the <i>Nimrod</i> was lying off the ice.</p>
			<p>On the return of the party they reported that the door had been burst open, evidently by a southerly blizzard, and was jammed by snow outside and in, so they made an entrance through one of the lee windows. They found the hut practically clear of snow, and the structure quite intact. I used the hut in the spring, <i>i.e.</i> September and October 1908, as a storehouse for the large amount of equipment, food, and oil that we were to take on the Southern journey. We built a sort of living-room out of the cases of provisions, and swept out the debris. The Southern Party elected to sleep there before the start, but the supporting party slept outside in the tents, as they considered it warmer.</p>
			<p>We still continued to use the lee window as means of ingress and egress to avoid continual shovelling away of the snow, which would be necessary as every southerly blizzard blocked up the main entrance. The various depot parties made use of the hut for replenishing their stores, which had been sledged from my own hut to Hut Point. On the night of March 3, 1909, I arrived with the Southern Party, with a sick man, having been absent on the march 128 days. Our position was bad, as the ship was north of us. We tried to burn the Magnetic Hut in the hope of attracting attention from the ship, but were not able to get it to light. We finally managed to light a flare of carbide, and the ship came down to us in a blizzard, and all were safely aboard at 1 a.m. on March 4, 1909. Before leaving the hut we jammed the window up with baulks of timber, to the best of our ability, in the storm and darkness. The hut was used again by the Ross Sea Section of this last Expedition. The snow was cleared out and extra stores were placed in it. From reports I have received the <i>Discovery</i> Hut was in as good condition in 1917 as it was in 1902.</p>
			<p>The stores placed there in 1902 are intact. There are a few cases of extra provisions and oil in the hut, but no sleeping gear, or accommodation, nor stoves, and it must not be looked upon as anything else than a shelter and a most useful <i>pied-à-terre</i> for the start of any Southern journey. No stores nor any equipment have been taken from it during either of my two Expeditions.</p>
			<p><br/> (2) CAPE ROYDS HUT</p>
			<p>For several reasons, when I went into McMurdo Sound in 1908 in command of my own Expedition, known as the British Antarctic Expedition, after having failed to land on King Edward VII Land, I decided to build our hut at Cape Royds—a small promontory twenty-three miles north of Hut Point. Here the whole shore party lived in comfort through the winter of 1908. When spring came stores were sledged to Hut Point, so that should the sea-ice break up early between these two places we might not be left in an awkward position. After the return of the Southern Party we went direct north to civilization, so I never visited my hut again. I had left, however, full instructions with Professor David as to the care of the hut, and before the whole Expedition left, the hut was put in order. A letter was pinned in a conspicuous place inside, stating that there were sufficient provisions and equipment to last fifteen men for one year, indicating also the details of these provisions and the position of the coal store. The stove was in good condition, and the letter ended with an invitation for any succeeding party to make what use they required of stores and hut. The hut was then locked and the key nailed on the door in a conspicuous place. From the report of Captain Scott’s last Expedition the hut was in good condition, and from a still later report from the Ross Sea side of this present Expedition, the hut was still intact.</p>
			<p><br/> (3) CAPE EVANS HUT</p>
			<p>This large and commodious hut was constructed by Captain Scott at Cape Evans on his last Expedition. The party lived in it in comfort, and it was left well supplied with stores in the way of food and oil, and a certain amount of coal. Several of the scientific staff of this present Expedition were ashore in it, when the <i>Aurora</i> , which was to have been the permanent winter quarters, broke adrift in May 1915, and went north with the ice. The hut became the permanent living quarters for the ten marooned men, and thanks to the stores they were able to sustain life in comparative comfort, supplementing these stores from my hut at Cape Royds. In January 1917, after I had rescued the survivors, I had the hut put in order and locked up.</p>
			<p>To sum up, there are three available huts in McMurdo Sound.</p>
			<p>(a) The <i>Discovery</i> Hut with a certain amount of rough stores, and only of use as a point of departure for the South.</p>
			<p>(b) Cape Royds Hut with a large amount of general stores, but no clothing or equipment now.</p>
			<p>(c) Cape Evans Hut with a large amount of stores, but no clothing or equipment and only a few sledges.</p>
			<p><br/> (4) DEPOTS SOUTH OF HUT POINT</p>
			<p><br/> In spite of the fact that several depots have been laid to the south of Hut Point on the Barrier, the last being at the Gap (the entrance to the Beardmore Glacier), no future Expedition should depend on them as the heavy snowfall obliterates them completely. There is no record of the depots of any Expedition being made use of by any subsequent Expedition. No party in any of my Expeditions has used any depot laid down by a previous Expedition.</p>
			<hr/>
			<h2>
				<a name="25"> INDEX </a>
			</h2>
			<p> </p>
			<blockquote style="margin-top:5.0pt;margin-bottom:5.0pt">
				<p>Adare, Cape<br/> Admiralty<br/> Range<br/> Agag<br/> Aitken<br/> Albatross<br/> Allardyce Range<br/> Allen, James<br/> Amphipods<br/> Amundsen<br/> (dog)<br/> “Ancient Mariner,” <br/> Animal life in Weddell Sea<br/> <i>See also</i> Penguins Seals <i>and</i> Bird life<br/> Annewkow Island<br/> Antarctic Circle<br/> Derby<br/> Argentine<br/> Armitage, Cape<br/> Lieut.<br/> Atmospheric effects<br/> <i>See also</i> Mirage <i>and</i> Sun<br/> Attempt to cut ship out<br/> <i>Aurora,</i> <br/> Aurora Australis<br/> Australia</p>
				<p>Bakewell<br/> Barne Glacier<br/> Barrier<br/> Great Ice<br/> surface<br/> Beardmore Glacier<br/> Beaufort Island<br/> Belgica Straits<br/> Bergs<br/> Bergschrund<br/> Bernsten, Mr.<br/> Bird life in Weddell Sea<br/> Black Island<br/> Blackborrow<br/> Blizzards, severe<br/> Blue Ice Glacier<br/> Bluff<br/> depot<br/> Boats<br/> Bovril<br/> British territory<br/> Brocklehurst, Capt. H. Courtney<br/> Browning<br/> Bruce, Dr. W. S.<br/> Buenos Ayres<br/> Burberry clothing<br/> Butler Point depot</p>
				<p>Caird Coast<br/> Sir James<br/> <i>Caird, James</i> (boat)<br/> Candlemas Volcano<br/> Cape Barne<br/> Bernacchi<br/> Bird<br/> Cotter<br/> Crozier<br/> Evans<br/> Horn weather<br/> Hudson<br/> pigeons<br/> Ross<br/> Royds<br/> Valentine<br/> Wild<br/> Castle Rock<br/> Cave Cove<br/> Cheetham<br/> Chile<br/> Christmas celebrations<br/> Clarence Island<br/> Clark<br/> Coal, Antarctic<br/> on deck<br/> Coats’ Land<br/> Con (dog)<br/> Cook<br/> Cope<br/> Corner Camp<br/> Coulman Islands<br/> Crean<br/> Current meter<br/> Cyclone</p>
				<p>Danger Islands<br/> Davis, Captain John K.<br/> Daylight saving<br/> Deception Islands<br/> <i>Diatoms</i> <br/> <i>Discovery</i> <br/> Discovery Bay<br/> Mount<br/> Distances, Ross Sea Party<br/> Dog-pemmican<br/> Dogs<br/> Dominican gulls<br/> Dudley Docker Mr.<br/> <i>Dudley Docker</i> (boat)<br/> Dunlop Island<br/> Dump Camp</p>
				<p>Eclipse of moon<br/> Elephant Island<br/> <i>Emma</i> <br/> Empire Day celebrations<br/> <i>Encyclopaedia Britannica</i> <br/> Enderby Land<br/> <i>Endurance</i> <br/> abandoned<br/> beset<br/> crushed<br/> sunk<br/> Erebus Mount<br/> Expedition ships<br/> first made public<br/> Mawson<br/> Scott<br/> Shackleton<br/> Swedish</p>
				<p>Falkland Islands<br/> Wireless listened for<br/> Farthest South<br/> Scott’s<br/> Filchner<br/> Financial help, appeal for<br/> failure to materialize<br/> promised<br/> Fish, dead<br/> from sea-leopard<br/> new species<br/> Föhn effect<br/> Fortuna Bay<br/> Glacier<br/> Franklin Island</p>
				<p>Galley<br/> Gallipoli<br/> Garrard, Mr. Cherry<br/> Gaze<br/> Girling tractor-motor<br/> Glacier Bay<br/> Tongue<br/> <i>Glasgow</i> , H.M.S.<br/> Gold<br/> Graham Land<br/> Greenstreet<br/> Grytviken<br/> Gunner (dog)</p>
				<p>Half-way Camp<br/> Harding, Mr.<br/> <i>Harpoon</i> <br/> Hayward<br/> Hercules (dog)<br/> Hobart<br/> Holness<br/> Hooke<br/> Hope Bay<br/> Mountain<br/> Howe<br/> Hudson<br/> Hurley<br/> Hurtado, Admiral Muñoz<br/> Hussey<br/> Husvik<br/> Hut, Cape Evans<br/> Cape Royds<br/> Elephant Island<br/> at Hut Point;<br/> Hut Point</p>
				<p>Ice-blink<br/> Ice-hole<br/> Inaccessible Island<br/> <i>Instituto de Pesca</i> </p>
				<p>Jack<br/> Jaeger sleeping-bags<br/> James<br/> Joinville Land<br/> Joyce</p>
				<p>Kavenagh<br/> Kelvin sounding machine<br/> Kerr<br/> Khyber Pass<br/> Killer whales<br/> King Haakon Bay<br/> King George V, flag<br/> to inspect <i>Endurance</i> <br/> telegram from<br/> telegram to</p>
				<p>Lambton, Miss Elizabeth Dawson<br/> Lamps<br/> Larkman<br/> Leap Year Day<br/> Leith<br/> Lucas sounding machine<br/> Luitpold Land<br/> <i>Lusitania</i> </p>
				<p>Mackintosh<br/> Macklin<br/> Macquarie Island<br/> Magnetic Pole<br/> storm<br/> variation<br/> Magellan Straits<br/> Marston<br/> Mauger<br/> McCarthy<br/> McDonald, Allen<br/> McIlroy<br/> McLeod<br/> McMurdo Sound<br/> McNab, Dr.<br/> McNeish<br/> Meteorology<br/> Midwinter’s Day celebrations<br/> Minna Bluff<br/> Mirage<br/> Montevideo<br/> Morell Land<br/> Morell’s Farthest South<br/> Motor crawler<br/> sledge<br/> tractor<br/> Mount Haddington<br/> Melbourne<br/> Murchison<br/> Sabine<br/> Mugridge<br/> Mutton Island</p>
				<p>New South Greenland<br/> New Year Island<br/> New Zealand<br/> Nigger (dog)<br/> <i>Nimrod</i> <br/> Ninnis<br/> Nordenskjold<br/> Ice Tongue<br/> North Polar Basin<br/> Norwegian Whalers<br/> Nurse Cavell</p>
				<p>Orde-Lees<br/> <i>Orita</i> <br/> <i>Orwell</i> <br/> Oscar (dog)</p>
				<p>Pack-ice<br/> described<br/> <i>See also</i> Pressure<br/> Paddies<br/> Pardo, Captain Luis<br/> Paulet Island<br/> Peak Berg<br/> Foreman<br/> Peggotty Camp<br/> Penguins<br/> Adelie<br/> Emperor<br/> Gentoo<br/> Ringed<br/> Peter (dog)<br/> Petrels<br/> <i>See also</i> Bird life<br/> Pinkey (dog)<br/> <i>Plankton</i> <br/> Pompey (dog)<br/> Porpoises<br/> Port Chalmers<br/> Positions<br/> Possession Bay<br/> Islands<br/> Potash and Perlmutter<br/> Pram Point<br/> Pressure in Ross Sea<br/> in Weddell Sea<br/> <i>See also</i> Pack-ice<br/> Prince George Island<br/> Programme of Expedition<br/> Public Schools<br/> Punta Arenas<br/> Pups</p>
				<p>Queen Alexandra</p>
				<p><i>Radiolaria</i><br/> Rain<br/> Rats on South Georgia<br/> Rampart Berg<br/> Razorback Island<br/> Reeling Berg<br/> Refraction, <i>See</i> Atmospheric effects<br/> Reindeer<br/> Richards<br/> Rickenson<br/> Rio Secco<br/> Rocky Mountain Depot<br/> Ross<br/> Island<br/> Sea<br/> Sea Party<br/> Royal Geographical Society<br/> Ryan, Lieut. R.N.R.</p>
				<p>Safety Camp<br/> Saint (dog)<br/> Sally (dog)<br/> Samson (dog)<br/> Sanders Island<br/> Santiago<br/> Saunders, Edward<br/> Scientific observations commenced<br/> work proposed<br/> <i>Scotia</i> <br/> Scott<br/> Sea-elephants<br/> Sea-leopard<br/> Seal blubber<br/> meat<br/> Seals<br/> Crab-eater<br/> Ross<br/> Weddell<br/> Semaphore for sledging parties<br/> on bridge<br/> Shags<br/> Shackleton, Sir E.<br/> Shoaling, of sea-floor<br/> Shore party<br/> Sledging parties, proposed<br/> Snapper (dog)<br/> Snow Hill<br/> Soldier (dog)<br/> Sorlle, Mr.<br/> South Georgia<br/> Orkneys<br/> Sandwich Group<br/> <i>Southern Sky</i> <br/> Spencer-Smith<br/> Splitting ice-floes<br/> Stained Berg<br/> Stancomb Wills, Dame Janet<br/> <i>Stancomb Wills</i> (boat)<br/> Stenhouse<br/> Stevens<br/> Stove<br/> Stromness<br/> Sue (dog)<br/> Sun disappears<br/> <i>See also</i> Atmospheric effects<br/> Swell</p>
				<p>Temperature, air<br/> sea<br/> Tent Island<br/> Tents<br/> orderlies<br/> Terns, <i>See also</i> Bird life<br/> Terriss, Ellaline<br/> “The Ritz”<br/> Thom, Captain<br/> Thompson<br/> Tide-rip<br/> Tobacco substitutes<br/> Towser (dog)<br/> Transcontinental party<br/> Tripp, Mr. Leonard<br/> Talloch, Mr.<br/> Turk’s Head</p>
				<p>Uruguayan Government</p>
				<p>Vahsel Bay<br/> Victoria Mountains<br/> Vincent<br/> Vinie’s Hill<br/> Virol</p>
				<p>Wave, enormous<br/> Weddell Sea<br/> ice conditions in<br/> plateau<br/> winds in<br/> Weather at Cape Evans<br/> at Elephant Island<br/> at Ocean Camp<br/> at Patience Camp, <i>See also</i> Temperatures<br/> Western Mountains<br/> Whales<br/> blue<br/> humpback and finner seen<br/> sperm<br/> Wilhelmina Bay<br/> Willywaw<br/> Winston Churchill<br/> Wild, Ernest<br/> Frank<br/> Wordie<br/> Worsley<br/> Wreckage at South Georgia</p>
				<p>Yaks<br/> <i>Yelcho</i> <br/> Young, Mr. Douglas<br/> Young Island</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>


